Scholastic BookFiles
A READING GUIDE TO
Holes
by Louis Sachar
™
Monique Vescia
Copyright © 2003 by Scholastic Inc.
Interview © 2003 by Louis Sachar
All rights reserved. Published by Scholastic Inc.
SCHOLASTIC, SCHOLASTIC REFERENCE, SCHOLASTIC BOOKFILES, and associated
logos are trademarks and/or registered trademarks of Scholastic Inc.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, or stored in a retrieval
system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without written
permission of the publisher. For information regarding permission,
write to Scholastic Inc., Attention: Permissions Department, 557
Broadway, New York, NY 10012.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Vescia, Monique.
Scholastic BookFiles: A Reading Guide to Holes
by Louis Sachar/by Monique Vescia.
p. cm.
Summary: Discusses the writing, characters, plot, and themes of
this 1999 Newbery Award–winning book. Includes discussion
questions and activities. Includes bibliographical references (p. ).
1. Sachar, Louis, 1954– . Holes—Juvenile literature.
2. Homeless persons in literature—Juvenile literature.
3. Friendship in literature—Juvenile literature.
4. Boys in literature—Juvenile literature. [1. Sachar, Louis,
1954– . Holes. 2. American literature—History and criticism.]
I. Title: A Reading Guide to Holes by Louis Sachar. II. Title.
PS3569.A226 H6538 2003
813'.54—dc21 2002191229
0-439-46336-X
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 03 04 05 06 07
Composition by Brad Walrod/High Text Graphics, Inc.
Cover and interior design by Red Herring Design
Printed in the U.S.A. 23
First printing, July 2003
About Louis Sachar 5
How Holes Came About 9
An Interview with Louis Sachar 12
Chapter Charter: Questions to Guide Your Reading 19
Plot: What’s Happening? 26
Setting/Time and Place: Where in the World Are We? 31
Themes/Layers of Meaning: Is That What It
Really Means? 35
Characters: Who Are These People, Anyway? 41
Opinion: What Have Other People Thought
About Holes? 48
Glossary 51
Louis Sachar on Writing 53
You Be the Author! 55
Activities 58
Related Reading 62
Bibliography 64
Contents

About Louis Sachar
“I want kids to think that reading can
be just as much fun and more so than
TV or video games or whatever else
they do.”
—Louis Sachar
Holes tells the story of how a single event—a pair of
sneakers falling out of the sky—changes the course of a
person’s life. Author Louis Sachar knows a thing or two about
that: In college he signed up for a job as a teacher’s aide at an
elementary school because he thought it sounded easy. As it
turned out, the time Sachar spent working with the kids at
Hillside Elementary School in California inspired him to try
writing children’s books. Now he’s an award-winning author!
Louis Sachar (pronounced Sacker) was born in East Meadow,
New York, on March 20, 1954. Sachar’s mother stayed at home
to care for Louis and his older brother, Andy. Their father
commuted to New York City to work on the seventy-eighth floor
of the Empire State Building. Sachar’s father sold Italian shoes,
which may help explain the strange significance of footwear in
the plot of Holes.
5
As a kid, Sachar remembers trying to fit in. He played in the
Little League, ran track when he was in middle school, and was a
good student. He liked reading books, especially those by E. B.
White, who wrote Charlotte’s Web and Stuart Little. Sachar also
recalls having to stay clear of the woods across the street from
his house where the older, tougher kids liked to play. When he
was nine, his family moved west, to a town called Tustin in
southern California.
“Writing was always my first love,” Sachar insists, but he worked
at a variety of other jobs before becoming an author. He even had
a short but surprisingly successful career as a Fuller Brush Man,
selling scrub brushes and other household items door-to-door.
Sachar went to college at the University of California at Berkeley,
where he majored in economics. He graduated in 1976. After
college, Sachar worked in a sweater warehouse in Norwalk,
Connecticut, and wrote at night. He continued writing even after
he enrolled in school to become a lawyer. In fact, it was during
his first week in law school that Sachar got the news that his first
book, Sideways Stories from Wayside School (1978), had been
accepted for publication. After graduating from law school,
Sachar worked part-time as a lawyer for eight years while he
continued writing children’s books. He finally quit practicing law
in 1989 to become a full-time writer.
To date, Sachar has published twenty-one books for children. He
clearly has a gift for creating memorable characters that readers
want to hear more about. Sachar’s first book, Sideways Stories
from Wayside School, evolved into a series of zany tales about a
6
school accidentally built sideways, that is, thirty stories tall with
one class on each floor. Sachar has also written a series of books
featuring a character named Marvin Redpost, a boy who believes
he is actually a prince who was kidnapped at birth. Holes, a more
complex and ambitious book than Sachar’s earlier works, was
published in 1998.
Sachar’s editor Frances Foster has compared his success to that
of Roald Dahl, the author of Charlie and the Chocolate Factory
and James and the Giant Peach. “Louis was discovered by the
children who loved his books, like the Wayside stories. There are
books which adults discover and push onto kids—this was
completely the other way around.” It’s easy to see why the absurd
humor of a book like Sideways Stories from Wayside School
would appeal to young readers: In one chapter, a smelly new
student turns out to be a dead rat dressed in layers of overcoats!
Sachar’s books have won many awards. Holes earned a dozen
honors and became the first book ever to win both the Newbery
Medal and the National Book Award for Young People’s Literature
in the same year. The Newbery, the most prestigious prize in
American literature for children, is awarded annually by the
children’s librarians of the American Library Association. Another
great honor, the National Book Award, is presented to one book
each year selected by the National Book Foundation as an
outstanding contribution to children’s literature. Sachar receives
a lot of fan letters from readers who have enjoyed his books, and
he visits schools and bookstores all over the country where he
reads and talks about his work.
7
Sachar currently lives in Austin, Texas. He met his wife, Carla,
while visiting an elementary school where she worked as a
counselor. Their daughter, Sherre, was born in 1987. Sachar
enjoys playing chess, tennis, and tournament bridge. He also
likes to ski and play guitar. He has two dogs named Tippy and
Lucky. They are the only company allowed in his office while he
is writing.
8
How Holes Came About
“It took me a year and a half to write
Holes, and nobody knew anything about
it, not even my wife or my daughter.”
—Louis Sachar
I
f Louis Sachar had never moved to Texas—if he had stayed on
the East Coast where he was born or in California where he
went to school—there’s a good chance Holes might never have
been written. In his acceptance speech for the Boston Globe–Horn
Book Award, one of the many prizes he has won for the book,
Sachar told the audience, “Holes was inspired by my dislike of
the hot Texas summer.” Luckily, Sachar was in the right place at
the right time to dream up this award-winning tale. In contrast,
the unlikely hero of the darkly humorous story seems to always
be in the wrong place at the wrong time. Then again, if Stanley
hadn’t walked under that freeway overpass at just the right
moment... well, who knows what might have happened to him?
“When the shoes first fell from the sky, [Stanley] remembered
thinking that destiny had struck him.”
Sachar spent eighteen months writing Holes, which,
coincidentally, is the length of Stanley’s sentence at Camp Green
Lake. Sometimes the work of bringing this wonderful story to
9
light seemed like hard labor to its creator: “As I was writing the
novel, I identified with my main character, Stanley Yelnats, who
had to dig a hole each day, five feet deep and five feet wide, under
the blazing Texas sun. Most days I, too, felt like I was struggling
for no apparent reason.” As is his practice, Sachar kept all of the
details about the book to himself until he finished it. “By not
permitting myself to talk about Holes, I was forced to write it. The
story was growing inside me for a year and a half, and I had no
other way to let it out.”
Every writer has his or her influences, and two books in
particular provided inspiration for this one: Kurt Vonnegut’s
Hocus Pocus and William Goldman’s The Princess Bride. As
Sachar told the Austin Chronicle, “I like the way the opening
chapters [of Hocus Pocus] were sort of short and jumpy, and how
they led into the story.... And The Princess Bride had these
colorful characters and this bizarre setting, and that’s sort of
like Holes.”
Holes was first published in 1998, when Sachar’s daughter,
Sherre, was in fourth grade. She told her father she thought the
Warden, the mysterious red-haired woman in charge of Camp
Green Lake, was scary. Sachar was surprised when other readers
agreed. He’d imagined the Warden, with her venomous
fingernails, as a cartoonish and exaggerated villain, like the
characters in comic books. Sachar says he based the figure of the
Warden on a woman he knows. “But she’s not nasty like the
Warden, not at all. She’s very nice.” All the other characters and
events in Holes come from Sachar’s imagination, including the
10
yellow-spotted lizards that play such an important role in the
story.
During his career as an author, Sachar has invented many
memorable characters, which have reappeared in later books in
the Wayside School and Marvin Redpost series. The plot
structure of Holes makes the possibility of a sequel unlikely,
however. The lifting of the Yelnats family curse and the closure of
Camp Green Lake suggest we will not be hearing any more about
Stanley Yelnats. As the narrator of Holes says at the novel’s
conclusion, “You will have to fill in the holes yourself.”
11
An Interview with Louis Sachar
In Holes, the character of X-Ray says that every kid in the world
wants to dig a big hole. Was this true of you? Did you ever do it?
No, but the idea of it sounded like fun.
About being a writer
What experience—or maybe it was a person or a teacher—first
encouraged you to imagine yourself as a writer?
I think it was in high school that I [learned to like] to write.
Probably because my brother did. I don’t think any teacher in
particular directed me that way. If I was influenced by anyone, I
guess it was by J. D. Salinger and Kurt Vonnegut, the authors I
was reading at that time.
Were little stories and stuff like that the first things you remember
enjoying writing?
Yeah, I took a creative writing class when I was a senior in high
school.
12
Do you think that was worthwhile? There’s always that question
of whether you can teach writing.
Oh, I think it was very worthwhile, not so much because of
anything the teacher taught us but because we had to write a
story every week or every two weeks and because every time you
write you learn from your writing.
How do you prepare to write a book? Do you keep notes or a
journal, or do any particular kind of research?
No. I sit at my desk and think, Oh, what am I going to do?
[Sachar laughs.] It’s a real slow process, and I might go week
after week and not be able to come up with anything that
interests me enough to sit down and write about. So...there are
a lot of days where I feel like I just can’t think of anything. And at
some point I get an idea and I start to explore it and write a little
bit about it and it grows, and new ideas spring from that, and
that’s how the story gets started.
Many of your books have evolved into sequels. What are some of
the pleasures of writing about the same characters in many
different situations, and what are some of the difficulties of that?
To me the most fun part of writing is creating the new
characters. Sequels are less enjoyable to write, but in a lot of
ways they’re easier because you already know the characters.
13
Are you encouraged, in part, to write sequels by the response of
your readers who want to hear more about those characters?
That was definitely the case with [the] Wayside School [series].
Marvin Redpost was always written with the idea that there
would be several of them. And then one of my very early books
was Someday, Angeline, and with that one I really liked all the
characters a lot but when I looked back on it years later I didn’t
really think the story was all that engaging. And so I thought I
would try to give those characters another chance. So . . . the
same characters are in the book Dogs Don’t Tell Jokes.
What’s the nicest compliment you’ve ever received as a writer?
Besides, of course, winning the Newbery and all those other
awards!
Well, I hear all the time from kids or from parents who tell me
their kids never liked to read and then all of a sudden they read
one of my books and they can’t stop. I’ve heard that a lot and
that always feels really good.
Do you read reviews of your work?
I read them. I mean, I’m always curious what people think and
also what reviewers think because other people are going to read
that. Reviews don’t necessarily influence anything I write. But
often I’ve been very impressed by the reviewer because, especially
if it’s a good review, it can also analyze what I did and I would
think, Yeah, that’s right, that is what I did! I don’t analyze what I
14
do when I write. I always did poorly in English classes because I
could always sort of internalize a book but I could never say what
it was that really moved me about the book. It’s the same way
with my own writing.
Did winning the Newbery and other awards for Holes make it
difficult to write the next book? Was the next one Marvin Redpost
for Class President?
It was, but that was written before all the success of Holes. It
took a year and a half after I wrote Holes before it was published,
and during that time I was working on [the] Marvin Redpost
[series]. Of course, those were much simpler books. They weren’t
trying to be as big and as grand as Holes.
So you do see Holes as an ambitious book? Did you feel that way
when you were launching yourself into it?
Yes. I mean, all the other books I’d written had been about kids
in school with a familiar background. But this was completely
different; the story was all this past history and wide-open
adventure. It was a lot different from anything else I’d written.
And when I finished writing it and people would ask me, “Is this
going to make it hard to write your next book?” I always felt that
no, it added to my confidence. But it’s been awhile, and I still
haven’t written that next book! [Sachar laughs.] So I think I do
feel the pressure to try to equal Holes, to come up with
something again that will be big and grand. . . . You know, Holes
is read by both adults and children, so . . . I feel like, well, do I
want to write for children next or do I want to write for adults?
15
I imagine Texas probably wants to claim you, but do you see
yourself as a part of any regional literary community?
No. I don’t feel like a part of any literary community. I don’t meet
with other writers. It’s just me alone in my room, and then going
and speaking at different places around the country.
Do you enjoy the solitary nature of being a writer? Or is that one of
the things that’s hard about it?
Both. I mean, I generally enjoy it and I think I’d have a hard time
not having that, but at the same time it does make it difficult to
always have to be self-motivated. But for the last year or two I’ve
been working on the movie of Holes, and that’s meant
cooperating with many other people.
Making Holes into a movie
What were some of the challenges of adapting Holes for a
screenplay?
The hardest part for me was just being able to see it as a movie
. . . to get the rhythm of the movie in your mind instead of the
rhythm of the book. And a lot of people, when I mention that
[Holes was made into] a movie, say to me, “Oh, that’s perfect! You
know, I visualize it so well when I’m reading the book.” But it’s
different, because a lot of that visualizing they’re doing is in their
mind. I might have just given a few little clues—saying it’s hot,
he’s thirsty—and then they draw from that this whole picture.
16
But for the screenplay you have to describe every picture, and
you have to do it in a very succinct [brief] way. It’s not left to the
imagination. You have to tell the director and the actors and the
camera what they’re looking at, what they’re actually seeing. So
that was more difficult.
About Holes
At what point in writing Holes did you decide that your protagonist
would have a palindrome for a name?
When I first came up with the name, it was just something to put
down on paper. I didn’t feel like thinking of his name, so I just
wrote Stanley and then wrote it backwards. I always figured I
would change it. [But] at some point into the story. . . I thought
that I wasn’t going to change it. I liked the fact that it gave a kind
of quirky humor to the beginning of the book. So that even
though you knew Stanley was sent to this awful place for a crime
he didn’t commit, you know right away that it’s not going to be
just this grim story. And then the other reason I kept the name is
because it was an easy way of telling the reader that he had the
same name as his father and his grandfather and his greatgrandfather, without making it stand out, without [making the
reader think], Well, why are you telling me this? Because it’s
important at the end, you know, that his great-grandfather was
also named Stanley. If you just said, Oh, by the way, he has the
same name as his great-grandfather, well, who cares? But if you
make kind of a joke out of it—that all these people are named
because of this palindrome—then you don’t realize you’re being
told this vital piece of information.
17
I’m curious about your use of the second-person pronoun in the
book (for example, “You are now entering Camp Green Lake. . . .”).
Did you decide to write directly to the reader from the beginning, or
did that develop as you were writing?
That emerged as I was working on it. Especially the stuff where
I’d say, “‘You make the decision: Whom did God punish?’” I kind
of surprised myself that I was taking this tone... [and using]
things like “God’s thumb” and “You make the decision”—I mean,
it’s sort of this very high-handed tone of the writer. And I
surprised myself that I took on that tone.
There are a lot of passages in Holes that are very sad to read. I’m
thinking about when Zero is talking about his childhood. Were
those parts difficult to write?
I don’t remember. It’s all difficult.... Whenever I write I try to
keep it interesting and entertaining. I don’t like reading things
that are overly sentimental, so I would never want to write
something like that.
You obviously have a knack for creating characters that your
readers want to hear more about, and many of your other books
are part of a series. Are you planning a sequel to Holes?
[No, but] I’ve toyed with the idea of writing a story about Armpit
or X-Ray.
Finally, I just have to ask this: Do you suffer from foot odor?
No.
18
Chapter Charter:
Questions to Guide Your Reading
The following questions will help you think about the
important parts of each chapter.
Chapter 1
• What do you learn in this chapter about the setting of the
story? Based on its name, what would you imagine a place
called Camp Green Lake to be like? What is it really like?
Chapter 2
• Do you think it’s true that digging holes can turn a bad person
into a good one? What are some other unpleasant things you’ve
heard about that are supposed to “build character”?
Chapter 3
• Stanley’s father, an inventor, says, “I learn from failure.” What
do you think this means? Have you ever learned from failure?
Chapter 4
• What kind of tattoo does Mr. Sir have? What does this tell you
about him?
Chapter 5
• Why do the boys call Mr. Pendanski “Mom”? Does this
nickname suit him?
19
Chapter 6
• Why don’t the boys believe Stanley when he tells them he stole
the sneakers?
Chapter 7
• What does Stanley learn from digging his first hole? Why do
you think he feels proud when his hole is finished?
Chapter 8
• Do you believe in curses? Why or why not?
Chapter 9
• How do you feel about the nickname X-Ray gives Stanley? Do
you have a nickname? If so, how did you get it?
Chapter 10
• Why do the boys always line up for water in the same order?
What’s the significance to this order?
Chapter 11
• What does X-Ray ask Stanley to do? Why does Stanley agree to
this? What would you have done?
Chapter 12
• Mr. Pendanski tells Stanley: “You messed up your life, and it’s
up to you to fix it.” Do you agree with this?
Chapter 13
• What does Stanley gain when he agrees to help X-Ray? What
does he lose?
20
Chapter 14
• Were you surprised to discover that the Warden is a woman?
What else do you find out about the Warden in this chapter?
Chapter 15
• Do you think Zigzag and the other campers are correct in
believing that the Warden is always watching them, or are they
just being paranoid?
Chapter 16
• Can you think of some reasons why Zero might not be familiar
with any nursery rhymes or the show Sesame Street?
Chapter 17
• What does Stanley find out about Zigzag in this chapter?
Chapter 18
• Why do you think Stanley continues lying to his mom and dad
in his letters?
Chapter 19
• Why does Stanley tell Mr. Sir that he stole the sunflower seeds?
What would you have done?
Chapter 20
• The Warden does not raise her voice, and she usually speaks in
seemingly polite phrases. What makes her so menacing?
Chapter 21
• Why do you think Zero finishes Stanley’s hole for him?
21
Chapter 22
• Does Stanley seem like a good teacher? Have you ever tutored
anyone? What did you learn from the experience?
Chapter 23
• Does the portrait the author paints of Green Lake seem
realistic? Can you point to any details that strike you as too
good to be true?
Chapter 24
• How does Mr. Sir get back at Stanley? Do you think it is
Stanley’s fault that Mr. Sir got scratched?
Chapter 25
• Does it seem like Sam is a respected member of the Green Lake
community? Why or why not?
Chapter 26
• Based on the facts the author gives you, can you answer the
question, “Whom did God punish?”
Chapter 27
• Why don’t the other boys approve of Stanley and Zero’s
arrangement? Do you think it is fair to both boys?
Chapter 28
• Who else has turquoise-studded boots like Kate Barlow’s?
Chapter 29
• What do you think is the significance of Stanley’s vision of the
giant thumb?
22
Chapter 30
• Why doesn’t Stanley fight back when Zigzag taunts him? What
would you do in his position?
Chapter 31
• Why doesn’t Stanley go after Zero?
Chapter 32
• Thinking about Zero, “what worried [Stanley] the most . . . was
the fear that it wasn’t too late.” What does this mean?
Chapter 33
• Does Stanley approach his predicament intelligently? Is his
logic sound? What would you do in the same situation?
Chapter 34
• When Stanley sees Big Thumb, “[H]e kept walking toward it,
although he didn’t know why.” Why do you think Stanley keeps
going?
Chapter 35
• How would you describe Stanley and Zero’s relationship at this
point in the story?
Chapter 36
• What does Stanley learn about himself as they climb the
mountain? What does he learn about Zero?
Chapter 37
• Why do you think Stanley suddenly calls Zero Hector?
23
Chapter 38
• “[Stanley] thought only about each step, and not the
impossible task that lay before him.” Have you ever attempted
anything that seemed impossible? How did you approach it?
What did you learn from the experience?
Chapter 39
• Why do you think Zero chooses this moment to confess about
the stolen shoes?
Chapter 40
• Why is Stanley surprised to find the sack of jars and the shovel
so far down the mountain?
Chapter 41
• Zero says, “If I had just kept those old smelly sneakers, then
neither of us would be here right now.” Do you think he’s
right? Is there anything positive about their situation?
Chapter 42
• Stanley believes it was his destiny to be hit by those falling
shoes. What’s the difference between coincidence and destiny?
Do you believe in destiny?
Chapter 43
• When he hears Zero’s stories, how does Stanley feel about his
own family? How do these stories make you feel?
Chapter 44
• How do you think Stanley and Zero feel when the Warden
confronts them?
24
Chapter 45
• What do you learn about the Warden in this chapter? How
does it influence your feelings about her?
Chapter 46
• Why do you think Zero gives Stanley the thumbs-up sign?
Chapter 47
• The Warden’s name is Walker; who else in the story has the
same last name? Why might this be important?
Chapter 48
• Why won’t Stanley leave without Hector?
Chapter 49
• The chapter ends with these words: “. . . and for the first time in
over a hundred years, a drop of rain fell into the empty lake.”
Does this seem important to you? Why do you suppose the
author chose to end Part II here?
Chapter 50
• How has Stanley changed in the course of the story? Do you
think Stanley had a “hole” in his life before attending Camp
Green Lake? Does he have one now?
25
Plot: What’s Happening?
“Stanley was not a bad kid. He was
innocent of the crime for which he was
convicted. He’d just been in the wrong
place at the wrong time.”
—Holes
When your name is Stanley Yelnats, bad luck just seems to
run in the family. Stanley’s great-grandfather, the first
Stanley Yelnats, lost his fortune to an outlaw called Kissin’ Kate
Barlow. Stanley’s father is a luckless inventor whose experiments
keep failing. And now Stanley IV, our Stanley, has been wrongly
convicted of a crime he didn’t commit: stealing a pair of athletic
shoes. So Stanley doesn’t seem too surprised to find himself
headed off to a detention camp for bad boys in the middle of the
Texas desert.
Camp Green Lake takes its name from a lake that dried up more
than a hundred years ago. The camp is run by a sinister person
called the Warden. (Stanley is told, “There’s only one rule at
Camp Green Lake: Don’t upset the Warden.”) The Warden’s
second in command, Mr. Sir, introduces Stanley to life at the
camp: “You are to dig one hole each day, including Saturdays and
Sundays. Each hole must be five feet deep, and five feet across in
26
every direction. Your shovel is your measuring stick. Breakfast is
served at 4:30.” This punishment supposedly builds character,
but Stanley soon figures out the real reason for all the digging:
The Warden is searching for something buried in the lakebed.
Stanley is assigned to Group D, run by a counselor named Mr.
Pendanski, otherwise known as Mom. Nearly everyone at Camp
Green Lake has a nickname, and Stanley soon becomes
Caveman. At first Stanley seems to adjust well to camp life. The
work is exhausting and the shoveling gives him terrible blisters,
but he gradually grows stronger. “He figured that in a year and a
half he’d be either in great physical condition, or else dead.” As
an accepted member of Group D, Stanley even begins to enjoy a
sense of belonging he has never known before.
Then one day Stanley unearths something interesting: a small
golden tube engraved with the initials KB. As promised, he turns
the cylinder over to X-Ray, the group’s leader; X-Ray pretends to
find it in his own hole and hands it over to the Warden, hoping
for a reward. It’s clear that the tube is a clue to what lies buried
at the bottom of Green Lake, but Stanley knows “whatever they
were looking for, they were looking in the wrong place.”
As it happens, the tube comes from a lipstick that belonged to
Kissin’ Kate Barlow, the outlaw who robbed Stanley’s greatgrandfather and left him stranded in the desert. This is just one
of many coincidences that occur in Holes. (A coincidence is a
chance happening or meeting.) Sachar braids his plot together
from three different story lines, or narratives, two of which occur
in the past. Part of the fun of reading this book is seeing how
cleverly the author brings these different story lines together.
27
One of the stories from the past concerns Stanley’s great-greatgrandfather Elya. This narrative may remind you of a folktale,
because it uses many of the elements of this kind of story. As a
young man in Latvia, Elya made a promise to a woman named
Madame Zeroni. In return for her help, Elya agreed to fulfill three
tasks: He would carry Madame Zeroni up a mountain, help her
drink from a magical stream, and sing her a special song. But
Elya forgets to keep his promise when he sails off to America,
and the Yelnats family is cursed for generations to come.
The second story tells how a beautiful and kindhearted
schoolteacher becomes a notorious outlaw. Katherine Barlow was
the teacher in the town of Green Lake, before the lake dried up.
Katherine fell in love with Sam, the onion man. Because she was
white and Sam was black, their love had tragic consequences.
Charles Walker, a man who wanted Katherine Barlow for himself,
shot Sam to death. “Three days after Sam’s death, Miss
Katherine shot the sheriff while he was sitting in his chair
drinking a cup of coffee.... For the next twenty years Kissin’ Kate
Barlow was one of the most feared outlaws in all the West.” We
also learn that Kissin’ Kate buried her loot somewhere in the
lakebed. She died from a yellow-spotted lizard bite before she
could tell anyone where she’d hidden it.
More than a century later, the Warden wants desperately to find
Kate’s buried treasure. Meanwhile, Stanley has made a deal with
a camper named Hector Zeroni, or Zero. In exchange for reading
lessons, Zero will help Stanley dig his hole each day. This
arrangement stirs up resentment among the other boys, who
bring it to the Warden’s attention. The Warden and Mr.
Pendanski confront Stanley and Zero, demanding that the
28
lessons stop. “It causes him stress,” said Mr. Pendanski. “I know
you mean well, Stanley, but face it. Zero’s too stupid to learn to
read.” These insults are the last straw for Zero. He smashes his
counselor in the face with a shovel and runs off into the desert.
As the chances for Zero’s survival dwindle in the days that follow,
Stanley can’t ignore the nagging of his conscience. “What worried
him the most, however, wasn’t that it was too late. What worried
him the most... was the fear that it wasn’t too late.” Finally
Stanley escapes into the desert to search for Zero and,
miraculously, finds him alive. They set off together toward a rock
formation sticking up in the distance like a giant thumb. Stanley
recalls that after being robbed by Kate Barlow, his greatgrandfather claimed he “found refuge on God’s thumb,” and he
hopes that Big Thumb may offer salvation to him and Zero, too.
Zero is so sick that Stanley has to carry him up the mountain. At
the top, they find water to drink and wild onions to eat. As Zero
sleeps, Stanley sings him a lullaby that his father used to sing to
him. Without realizing it, Stanley has succeeded in fulfilling the
promise his great-great-grandfather Elya failed to keep.
In the shadow of Big Thumb, Stanley and Zero eat onions and
regain their strength. They decide to sneak back to camp and
find the treasure still believed to be buried there. Unfortunately,
the Warden catches them in the act and demands that they hand
over the metal suitcase they have unearthed. The hole where the
suitcase was buried turns out to be a nest of deadly yellowspotted lizards, which swarm all over Stanley and Zero. The boys
don’t move and the Warden and the counselors don’t grab the
loot for fear of being bitten. This standoff lasts until the law
29
30
arrives. The Attorney General of Texas and a lawyer named Ms.
Morengo, hired by Stanley’s father, show up with the news that
Stanley has been cleared and is free to go. The Warden claims the
suitcase belongs to her, but Zero can read the letters on its side,
which spell out STANLEY YELNATS.
However, Stanley won’t leave Camp Green Lake without Zero.
During their ordeal in the desert, the boys formed a real
friendship. Since Mr. Pendanski has erased Zero’s files from the
computer system, Stanley knows his friend is in danger of being
erased, too. The Attorney General can’t even determine why Zero
has been sent to the camp, so the two boys get to leave Camp
Green Lake along with the metal suitcase.
Stanley and Zero inadvertently succeed in bringing the whole
brutal system of the camp to an end. As they leave the camp, Ms.
Morengo gives Stanley more good news: His father has invented a
wonderful product that smells like peaches and eliminates foot
odor. At the book’s conclusion there is reason to hope that both
Stanley’s family and Zero will lead better lives, thanks in part to
the contents of the suitcase.
Thinking about the plot
• What are the different stories told in Holes? How do these
stories relate to one another?
• What is the relationship of the past to the present in this book?
• What types of holes exist in the story?
Setting/Time and Place:
Where in the World Are We?
“There is no lake at Camp Green Lake.
There once was a very large lake
here, the largest lake in Texas. That
was over a hundred years ago. Now it
is just a dry, flat wasteland.
“There used to be a town of Green
Lake as well. The town shriveled and
dried up along with the lake, and the
people who lived there.”
—Holes
You can tell that setting is important in Holes because that
is where the author begins. At first glance, this setting
seems like a realistic place: somewhere in the Texas desert, in
the present time. However, the novel constantly reminds us that
appearances can be deceiving. In the world of Holes, the reader
soon discovers that the real and the imaginary coexist and
sometimes even blur together.
Sachar locates Camp Green Lake in a dry lakebed in Texas, a
place where no rain has fallen in more than a century. The
punishing heat and uncomfortable conditions make this the
31
perfect spot for a prison. No guard towers or fences are necessary
because anyone attempting to run away would quickly die of
thirst and end up as “buzzard food,” as Mr. Sir puts it. The only
animals that can survive here are dangerous desert creatures:
scorpions, rattlesnakes, and the deadly yellow-spotted lizards
that everyone fears.
However, Green Lake wasn’t always dry, which is something else
we learn in the revealing opening paragraph. The fossil fish that
Stanley digs up serves as a reminder that this was once a
beautiful lake, which “sparkled like a giant emerald in the sun.”
Holes contains three stories, all intersecting in one place. One of
these stories tells how the lake, and the town named after it,
became a wasteland.
Stanley’s first impressions of Camp Green Lake sketch out a
stark picture for the reader: “The land was barren and desolate.
He could see a few rundown buildings and some tents. Farther
away there was a cabin beneath two tall trees. Those two trees
were the only plant life he could see. There weren’t even weeds.”
Sachar, who lives in Austin, says that the blistering Texas
summers gave him the first ideas for this book. On Stanley’s
second day at the camp, “The only thing that got him out of bed
was knowing that every second he wasted meant he was one step
closer to the rising of the sun. He hated the sun.”
These descriptive details seem realistic enough, but there are
also signs that Camp Green Lake is not an actual place.
Pockmarked with holes, the dry lakebed reminds Stanley of the
surface of the moon, an unearthly setting. The yellow-spotted
32
lizards we hear about do not really exist but are inventions of the
author. Big Thumb, the strange rock formation where Stanley’s
great-grandfather found refuge in the desert, marks a spot where
water miraculously runs uphill. This magical spring irrigates a
secret onion field, the source of a tonic that supposedly can cure
illness and prolong life. According to Sam, the onion man, a
steady diet of onions has helped his donkey, Mary Lou. She lived
to be almost fifty, “extraordinarily old for a donkey.”
The combination of realistic details and imaginary elements in
the setting of this book may remind you of a fable or a folktale,
demonstrating how Sachar borrows from these traditions in
Holes. Folk narratives typically include both real and fanciful
elements (think of the Paul Bunyan stories, for instance), and are
part of the culture of the American West.
In the stories in Holes that take place in the past, things are not
what they appear to be, either. The town of Green Lake seems too
good to be true—and it is. The narrator first describes it as a
“heaven on earth” where the sky is “painted pale blue and pink—
the same color as the lake and the peach trees along its shore.”
Like the mirage that confuses Stanley in the desert, making
him believe that he sees a pool of water as he searches for Zero,
the placid little town of Green Lake is a beautiful vision that
disappears when we look more closely. Before long, we witness
the ugliness of racism and violence that lurks beneath the
surface of the community.
Finally, in this book we must remember that what isn’t there
is as important as what is. A hole, after all, is a space where
33
34
something is missing, and this is also true of Camp Green Lake.
Read the first paragraphs of the book again and you’ll hear more
about what is missing from this setting than what is there. The
absence of water influences much of what happens to Stanley at
the camp. As Mr. Sir makes clear, the lack of water means that
escape from Camp Green Lake is practically impossible: “Nobody
runs away from here. We don’t need a fence. Know why? Because
we’ve got the only water for a hundred miles.”
Thinking about the setting
• Where does Holes take place?
• Which parts of the setting seem realistic to you? Which ones
do not?
• How does the setting influence what happens in the story?
Themes/Layers of Meaning:
Is That What It Really Means?
“The reader might find it interesting
that Stanley’s father invented his
cure for foot odor the day after the
great-great-grandson of Elya Yelnats
carried the great-great-greatgrandson of Madame Zeroni up the
mountain.”
—Holes
“Whatever goes around, comes around”
This expression means that, over time, all human actions have
appropriate consequences: Bad deeds are eventually punished,
and good deeds ultimately rewarded. A more complicated version
of this theme plays out repeatedly in the plot of Holes. The family
curse of the Yelnatses, the fate of the town of Green Lake, and
Stanley’s willingness to risk his life for a friend, all show that in
life, things come full circle. Throughout the story, objects from
the past keep turning up. The fossil fish Stanley unearths, Sam’s
rowboat, Katherine’s lipstick tube and spiced peaches, and
Stanley’s great-grandfather’s fortune are all reminders that
nothing stays buried forever, especially the truth.
35
After Elya Yelnats forgets his promise to Madame Zeroni and sets
sail for America, he is plagued by misfortune. “Elya worked hard,
but bad luck seemed to follow him everywhere. He always seemed
to be in the wrong place at the wrong time.” Back in Latvia,
Madame Zeroni had warned Elya that if he failed to keep his
promise to her, “he and his descendants would be doomed for all
of eternity.” Sachar leaves it to the reader to decide whether
curses really have any power. But the facts are these: Trouble
haunts the Yelnats family until Stanley manages to fulfill the
terms of his great-great-grandfather’s promise by carrying Hector
Zeroni up the mountain.
Elya’s failure to keep his promise results from his forgetfulness.
Like his descendant Stanley, he is a good-hearted, well-meaning
young man, and when he realizes his mistake, he feels genuinely
sorry. “He wasn’t afraid of the curse. He thought that was a lot of
nonsense. He felt bad because he knew Madame Zeroni had
wanted to drink from the stream before she died.” In comparison,
the lynching of Sam is a much more terrible offense. The citizens
of the town of Green Lake condemn Katherine and Sam—a white
woman and a black man—for daring to fall in love. After Sam’s
brutal murder, rain stops falling on Green Lake. When the lake
that sustained the community eventually evaporates, so does the
town. A century later, Trout Walker’s descendant, the Warden,
must still pay for her ancestor’s crimes.
Good deeds create a kind of fallout, too. By agreeing to teach
Zero to read, Stanley ensures they will both escape the Warden’s
clutches when Zero correctly identifies the name on the metal
suitcase. When he commits himself to stealing the water truck
36
and takes off in search of his friend, Stanley finally seizes control
of his own destiny, assumes responsibility for another person,
and sets in motion a series of events that results in the closing of
the camp.
Inheritance
A related theme in Holes is inheritance, or what gets passed
down from one generation to the next within a family. This may
mean everything from money and property to physical
characteristics like eye or hair color, or even things that aren’t
visible, such as responsibilities and character traits. You’ve
probably noticed that many of the characters in Holes are related
to one another. Characters in the stories that take place in the
past turn out to be ancestors of characters in the present. This
gives the reader a chance to see how the process of inheritance
plays out over time.
The book’s main character, Stanley Yelnats IV, has a name that
has been passed down for generations within his family. In the
Yelnats household, it’s a family joke to blame anything bad that
happens on “Stanley’s no-good-dirty-rotten-pig-stealing-greatgreat-grandfather,” the alleged source of the family curse. This
curse is supposedly why Stanley’s great-grandfather lost his
fortune in the desert, Stanley’s father perpetually fails as an
inventor, and Stanley gets shipped off to detention camp.
While Stanley may believe his bad luck stems from being a
Yelnats, his family also affords him certain advantages. One
feature of the family legacy is a certain kind of optimism:
37
“Despite their awful luck, they always remained hopeful. As
Stanley’s father liked to say, ‘I learn from failure.’” This
hopefulness enables Stanley to persevere even when things look
bleak.
While he has no friends at school, Stanley is rescued from real
loneliness by the love of his parents. His mother’s letter cheers
him up at camp; he has happy recollections of his father singing
him a lullaby that has been passed down in his family for
generations. When Stanley finds himself in the lizards’ nest and
expects to die at any minute, he finds comfort in memories from
his childhood.
Zero, on the other hand, is mostly alone in the world until the
book’s conclusion. He has inherited the penetrating eyes and
piercing intelligence of his great-great-great-grandmother
Madame Zeroni, along with a smile too big for his face. Before
abandoning him in a park, his mother taught Zero how to
provide for himself: “‘We always took what we needed,’ Zero said.
‘When I was little, I didn’t even know it was stealing. I don’t
remember when I found out.’”
In Holes, Zero, a homeless African-American kid with no family to
care about what happens to him, can be erased without a trace,
which is exactly what the Warden plans to do. Stanley may be
poor but compared with Zero he has many advantages, starting
with his skin color.
Another case of inheritance in the book concerns the Warden,
Ms. Walker. She is related to Charles “Trout” Walker, the wealthy
38
son of the family who owned land around Green Lake. The
Warden has inherited the task of searching for Kate Barlow’s
buried loot: “When I was little I’d watch my parents dig holes,
every weekend and holiday. When I got bigger, I had to dig, too.
Even on Christmas.” Finding this out may make you feel a little
differently about this character. Ultimately Ms. Walker has to sell
her family’s land after the camp is closed down.
Bullying
Bullying is another important theme in Holes. A boy named
Derrick Dunne bullies Stanley at the middle school they both
attend. “The teachers never took Stanley’s complaints seriously,
because Derrick was so much smaller than Stanley.” However,
bullies are not necessarily larger than their victims; a bully can
be anyone who tries to frighten, intimidate, or torment another
person by using physical threats, teasing, or other forms of
verbal abuse.
This book also shows that bullying doesn’t just happen between
kids, but can occur between adults as well. Stanley witnesses the
Warden bullying both Mr. Pendanski and Mr. Sir. An adult may
also bully a child, as Mr. Pendanski does with Zero, constantly
picking on him and insulting him. Mr. Pendanski never misses a
chance to tell Zero how stupid and worthless he is. When the
counselor finds out that Stanley has been giving Zero reading
lessons, he says scornfully, “You might as well try to teach this
shovel to read! It’s got more brains than Zero.” Stanley is also
bullied at camp, especially by Mr. Sir and by a boy named Zigzag.
39
40
As Stanley begins to feel accepted by the other campers in his
group, he has revenge fantasies. “Stanley played the scene over
and over again in his mind, each time watching another boy from
Group D beat up Derrick Dunne.” If you have ever been bullied at
school or in your neighborhood, you can probably identify with
Stanley and his daydreams.
Being bullied can be a terrible experience, and the sense of
powerlessness and humiliation it causes may be hard to forget.
Ironically, Derrick Dunne is ultimately responsible for clearing
Stanley, by giving him an alibi. Dunne tells Ms. Morengo, the
attorney, that Stanley was in the boys’ bathroom at the time of
the crime, trying to retrieve his notebook from the toilet: “Stanley
felt his ears redden. Even after everything he’d been through, the
memory still caused him to feel shame.”
Thinking about the themes
• What do you think is the main theme of Holes? What are some
other themes in the book?
• What are some of the things—either positive or negative—that
have been passed down in your family?
• Have you ever bullied anyone, or been the victim of a bully?
Characters: Who Are
These People, Anyway?
Since there are a few different story lines in this book, there
are a lot of different characters, many of whom are related to
one another or whose lives somehow cross. The main characters
are Stanley Yelnats and Hector Zeroni (“Zero”).
Here is a list of characters, divided into those in the present and
those in the past. Following that is a brief description of each of
the two main characters.
Characters in the present
Stanley Yelnats IV tall, heavy, camper in Group D,
main character
Hector Zeroni (“Zero”) small camper in Group D
X-Ray leader of the Group D campers,
wears thick glasses
Armpit tall camper in Group D
Magnet camper in Group D
Zigzag Group D camper with frizzy
blond hair
Squid camper in Group D
Twitch fidgety camper in Group D
Mr. Pendanski counselor for Group D
41
The Warden, Ms. Walker woman who runs Camp Green
Lake
Mr. Sir camp director
Stanley’s father inventor
Stanley’s mother homemaker
Derrick Dunne middle-school bully
Clyde “Sweet Feet” Livingston famous baseball player
Ms. Morengo patent attorney
Attorney General head lawyer for the state of Texas
Characters in the past
In Latvia
Elya Yelnats Stanley’s great-great-grandfather
Myra Menke beautiful but empty-headed girl
Madame Zeroni Zero’s great-great-greatgrandmother
Myra’s father decides who Myra will marry
In America
Sarah Miller Stanley IV’s great-greatgrandmother
Katherine Barlow a.k.a. Kissin’ Kate, schoolteacher
turned outlaw
Sam “Onion Sam,” an onion seller
Mary Lou Sam’s donkey
Charles “Trout” Walker rich man
Linda Walker Trout’s wife
42
Stanley Yelnats: The protagonist, or main character, of Holes,
Stanley, is a quiet, friendless boy who has grown up in a poor
family with loving parents. You may have noticed that many of
the characters in the book have a “signature”—a habit, gesture,
or phrase they repeat throughout the story, which tells you
something important about them. (For example, how many times
does Mr. Sir say, “This isn’t a Girl Scout camp”?) Stanley’s
signature is his shrug. When you read the book again, pay
attention to how often the author mentions that “Stanley raised
and lowered one shoulder.” A shrug lets Stanley respond without
really committing himself. Stanley often uses this gesture as a
way to deal with other people. After the Warden scratches Mr. Sir
with her poisonous fingernails, Stanley keeps quiet about what
he witnessed in the cabin: “Out on the lake, the other boys asked
Stanley what he knew about Mr. Sir’s face, but he just shrugged
and dug his hole. If he didn’t talk about it, maybe it would go
away.”
At the middle school he attends, Stanley gets teased for being
overweight. He has no friends and although he is big, Stanley is
frequently bullied by smaller kids. Even his teachers treat him
unkindly. Stanley can’t seem to stick up for himself, which is one
reason he winds up at Camp Green Lake.
Stanley comes from a poor family. Unsuccessful inventors like
Stanley’s father don’t earn much money, and Stanley and his
parents are “crammed in a tiny apartment” because they cannot
afford a bigger home. As a child, Stanley had fantasized about
going to summer camp, a luxury beyond his family’s means.
When Stanley is sent to Camp Green Lake, he and his parents
43
“tried to pretend that he was just going away to camp for a while,
just like rich kids do.”
It’s clear that Stanley has been raised in a loving environment,
and he is a loving and dutiful son. He promises his mother that
he will write home once a week, and he keeps that promise.
“Today was my first day at camp, and I’ve already made some
friends. We’ve been out on the lake all day, so I’m pretty tired. . . .”
The little lies that Stanley tells in his letters from camp seem to
be as much for his mother’s benefit as for his own: He doesn’t
want her to worry about him. When Stanley thinks he may die at
Camp Green Lake, his main concern is how this will affect his
folks: “For him, at least, it would be over. For his parents, the
pain would never end.”
In the Yelnats family, bad luck is an inherited trait, but so is the
ability to remain hopeful. His hope that Zero may still be alive
prompts Stanley to set out after him: “It’s too late, he told
himself. Zero couldn’t have survived. But what if it wasn’t too
late?” Hope keeps Stanley heading toward Big Thumb, even when
all logic says there can be no water there.
Stanley’s decision to go after Zero is a critical moment in the
evolution of his character. His willingness to commit himself to
Zero, the first real friend he has ever had, shows us that Stanley
is finally capable of taking control of his own destiny.
Hector Zeroni (“Zero”): Like Stanley, Zero is sent to Camp
Green Lake for stealing a pair of shoes. (As it turns out, he
actually stole the shoes Stanley is accused of stealing.) A
44
homeless African-American boy abandoned by his mother in a
city park, Zero is a thief by necessity rather than by choice. While
at first Zero might seem like a minor character, he becomes
important in the second half of the book when a friendship
develops between Stanley and him.
If Stanley’s signature is a shrug, Zero’s signature is his silence.
When you reread Holes, notice how often the narrator tells you
“Zero said nothing.” By repeatedly calling attention to Zero’s
silence, Sachar makes the reader very aware of it.
Zero is the smallest of the campers in Group D. His size and his
silence make him easy to overlook. Everyone at Camp Green
Lake underestimates Zero, especially Mr. Pendanski. While the
counselor appears friendly enough at first, his true nature
emerges in response to Zero. “You know why his name’s Zero?”
asks Mr. Pendanski. “Because there’s nothing inside his head.”
Even Stanley dismisses Zero at first: “He didn’t care what Zero
thought. Zero was nobody.”
Zero turns out to be extremely smart, however. Although he
cannot read, he has a natural talent for mathematics that
quickly impresses Stanley. One early clue to Zero’s intelligence is
his eyes, which seem to look right into people’s souls. In fact,
Zero has the same dark and penetrating eyes as his great-greatgreat-grandmother, Madame Zeroni. “When she looked at you,
her eyes seemed to expand, and you felt like she was looking
right through you.” Zero can see right through Mr. Pendanski’s
act and recognize him for the heartless person he really is. “If
anybody had X-Ray vision, it was Zero.”
45
When Stanley finally agrees to give him reading lessons, Zero
makes rapid progress. By the end of the book Zero can read well
enough to know that the letters on the suitcase spell out
Stanley’s name.
As the relationship between the two boys develops, Zero proves
he can be a loyal, brave, and generous friend. He defends Stanley
from Zigzag’s attack even though he is much smaller than Zigzag.
Later, when Stanley finds him under the overturned rowboat,
Zero gives Stanley half of his last jar of sploosh. When they climb
out of the lakebed, Zero helps hoist Stanley out with his shovel,
even though it means injuring his own hands.
Zero’s memories of his childhood make up some of the saddest
passages in Holes. Up on the mountain Zero tells Stanley about
the day his mother disappeared.
“And then one day she didn’t come back,” Zero said. His
voice sounded suddenly hollow. “I waited for her at Laney
Park.”
“Laney Park,” said Stanley. “I’ve been there.”
“You know the playscape?” asked Zero.
“Yeah. I’ve played on it.”
“I waited there for more than a month,” said Zero. “You
know that tunnel that you crawl through, between the
slide and the swinging bridge? That’s where I slept.”
46
47
Yet despite these hardships, Zero shows that he, like Stanley, can
still be hopeful, even under the worst circumstances. “When you
spend your whole life living in a hole,” he said, “the only way you
can go is up.”
Thinking about the characters
• Why is Stanley nicknamed “Caveman”? How does his character
change over the course of the book?
• How does Zero’s character change?
• What are the “signatures” of the other characters? What do
they tell you about them?
• Do the characters in the past seem as real or complex to you
as those in the present? Why or why not?
Opinion: What Have Other
People Thought About Holes?
Everybody digs this book!
Holes is the winner of the 1999 Newbery Medal. Of all the
children’s books published each year in the United States, only
one book earns this prize. The Newbery Medal honors the finest
contributions to American literature for children, and the
children’s librarians of the American Library Association choose
each year’s winner. A Newbery book displays a bronze medal on
its cover, a visible symbol of its literary excellence that has a
huge impact on book sales. Newbery authors are flooded with
invitations to read and sign their books. After winning the award,
Louis Sachar found himself very much in demand. The Newbery
Medal is just one of a dozen honors that Holes has earned. Look
inside the front cover of your book for a list of all the awards.
During the spring of 2002, all the kids in Seattle, Washington,
had their noses buried in Holes, the first book chosen for a new
citywide reading program called “What If All Kids Read the Same
Book?” This program is a version of the nationally known adult
reading program that encourages everyone in one city to read
and discuss the same book. Sachar’s novel was translated into
Hebrew and Chinese and converted into Braille, a system of
reading for the blind, for the program. The judges who selected
Holes decided that the book, which was already popular with
48
children and adults, would appeal to a whole range of readers
and encourage a lot of worthwhile discussion.
Stanley Yelnats, folk hero?
Boston Globe–Horn Book Award judge Maria B. Salvadore, one of
the judges who selected Holes as a winner from thousands of
submissions, has called Stanley Yelnats an “unlikely but likable
folk hero.” A folk hero is usually an ordinary person who
accomplishes something extraordinary to help or inspire other
people. Some real-life American folk heroes you may have heard
of include Johnny Appleseed, Sojourner Truth, and Woody
Guthrie. Paul Bunyan and Pecos Bill are some fictional folk
heroes you may be familiar with.
Putting the pieces together
In the New York Times Book Review, Betsy Hearne called Holes “a
smart jigsaw puzzle of a novel,” and praised the book’s intricate
plot in which different truths are revealed to the reader and to
Stanley, but not always at the same time. As Hearne pointed out,
“Every revelation of the past ups the ante of the present.”
Bringing Holes to the stage and screen
Spotlight on Stanley! Holes is a story in which nothing is quite
what it seems, so what better place to explore the deceptive
nature of appearances than in a theater? The Seattle Children’s
Theatre staged the book as a play, based on a script written by
Louis Sachar, which opened in April 2002 to favorable reviews.
49
50
Much-loved books are often adapted for the screen, and Holes is
no exception. A movie version of the novel came out in April 2003
starring Shia LaBeouf as Stanley, Khleo Thomas as Zero,
Sigourney Weaver as the Warden, and Patricia Arquette as Kissin’
Kate Barlow. Louis Sachar wrote the screenplay for the film.
Survivor: The Texas desert
When the film version of Holes came out, Sachar’s publisher
issued a companion book: Stanley Yelnats’s Survival Guide to
Camp Green Lake. Be sure to read it before you plan a camping
trip in the Texas desert.
Thinking about what others think about Holes
• Do you think Holes deserved to win the Newbery Medal? Have
you read other Newbery Medal–winning books? How do they
compare?
• Do you think Holes was a good choice for a citywide reading
program? What other books that you’ve read might make good
candidates for this program?
• Would you agree that Stanley qualifies as a folk hero? What
might make him an “unlikely” hero?
• Can you identify specific moments in the plot of Holes in which
something we learn about the past changes the meaning of
what is happening in the present?
Glossary 
Glossary
Here are some words used in Holes. Some may be new to
you or used in new ways.
authenticated proved that something is real and genuine
custody control exercised by a person or an authority; the legal
right to look after a child
defective imperfect or flawed
delirious confused and babbling
delirium a kind of mental disturbance, often accompanied by
hallucinations
despicable deserving to be disliked
grotesque very strange or ugly
hallucinations imagined things that aren’t really there;
delusions
incarcerated imprisoned; locked up
initiate to introduce or start something new
jurisdiction authority or control
legitimate lawful
mirage an optical effect that makes you think you see
something in the distance, like water, that is not really there
51
paranoid irrationally suspicious and distrustful of others
patent attorney a lawyer specializing in the rights to
inventions
perseverance not giving up, even when faced with obstacles
and difficulties
precarious dangerously unstable
promissory note a written promise to pay someone a certain
amount of money, like an IOU
pursuant to legal phrase meaning “according to”
refuge a place providing protection or shelter
stifling cutting off circulation or smothering
strenuous vigorously active
sundial a device for determining the time of day using sunlight.
A pointer casts a shadow that moves slowly around a flat,
marked dial.
tedious tiring and boring
ward a young person under the protection of the court
warden an official in charge of the operation of a prison
52
Louis Sachar on Writing
“Every time you write you learn from
your writing.”
—Louis Sachar
Stanley Yelnats, the quiet hero of Holes, has learned to keep
his mouth shut, since he believes that unpleasant things
have a way of becoming more real when you talk about them.
Stanley’s creator, Louis Sachar, also uses silence as a strategy. “I
never talk about a book until I’m finished writing it,” Sachar
says. “I think that is helpful for writing, as well as for anything
else that takes a lot of self-motivation. The more you talk about
something, the less you tend to do it.”
Each morning, Sachar holes up in his study to write. His dogs,
Tippy and Lucky, stand guard, ready to growl at anyone who
tries to disturb Sachar while he’s working. “Writing is a kind of
self-hypnosis,” he says. “Interruptions break the spell, and it’s
sometimes hard to get it back.”
Sachar writes for about two hours before he “runs out of steam.”
It’s amazing what he manages to accomplish in that relatively
short amount of time. So far he has written twenty-one books
this way!
53
A book may begin with just a little idea, sometimes just a
character trait. Sachar says that most of his ideas come from
what he remembers “doing and feeling and thinking as a child.”
He doesn’t plan or outline his stories in advance, so he doesn’t
know what will happen next. Each story goes through a series of
rewrites before Sachar feels satisfied with it.
“I write five or six drafts of each of my books. With each draft,
the story changes and the ideas are transformed. What amazes
me is that most days feel useless. I don’t seem to accomplish
anything—just a few pages, most of which don’t seem very good.
Yet, when I put all those wasted days together, I somehow end
up with a book of which I’m very proud.”
Until now, all of Sachar’s books have been written for children.
But Holes appeals to both kids and grown-ups. Now Sachar
wonders whether he should try his hand at writing something
intended for adults. That’s one way to make sure that your
audience never outgrows your books!
54
You Be the Author!
• Your writing process: Every writer has a process: a way of
working that is most productive for that individual. Some people
write best at night; others feel more creative in the afternoon.
One writer needs absolute quiet; another likes a little background
music. Louis Sachar is a morning writer, and at the start of each
day he spends two uninterrupted hours working on his latest
project. That may not seem like much to you—after all, the
average adult workday is eight hours or more—but so far Sachar
has managed to finish a shelf full of books this way!
What is your writing process? You probably already have a sense
of when and where you work best. Write a paragraph or two
describing your writing process in as much detail as possible. At
what time of day are you most productive? Do you write on the
computer or in longhand with a pen and paper? Do you like to be
near a window, or maybe even outdoors? Do you need a beverage
at your elbow to sip while you’re writing? Do you write multiple
drafts? Next time you have a writing assignment for school, be
aware of your own writing process and try to create the right
environment for your best work.
• Creating a guidebook: In Chapter 5 of Holes we learn,
“There’s really only one rule at Camp Green Lake: Don’t upset
the Warden.” But there are other rules for surviving in this harsh
55
environment, such as if you don’t bother rattlesnakes and
scorpions, they won’t bother you—usually, that is. Write a guide
for an unlucky camper headed for Camp Green Lake. What does
that person need to know in order to survive there?
• The Zeroni family reunion: At the end of Holes, Zero
(Hector) is accompanied by a woman we can assume to be his
mother. “A woman sitting in the chair behind Hector was
absentmindedly fluffing his hair with her fingers. She wasn’t very
old, but her skin had a weathered look to it, almost like leather.
Her eyes seemed weary, as if she’d seen too many things in her
life that she didn’t want to see. And when she smiled, her mouth
seemed too big for her face.” Imagine what the reunion between
these two characters might have been like, how and where and
when it took place, and what each person said and did. You
might want to write it in prose, as a continuation of the book, or
imagine it in a different form: a scene from a play or movie, a
poem, or the lyrics to a song.
• What’s your signature?: Many of the characters in Holes
have a signature: an identifying trait or mannerism that tells you
something important about them, such as X-Ray’s filthy glasses
or Onion Sam’s phrase “I can fix that.” The people you know
probably have signatures, too (your uncle Ed’s Yosemite Sam
mud flaps may speak volumes about him!). If you were a
character in a book, what do you think your signature might be?
Would it be a gesture, a phrase, an object, an article of clothing,
or something else? Write a page or two describing yourself as if
you were a character in a book and incorporate your signature
into that description.
56
• Tell a tall tale: Part of what makes Holes such a good read
is the way Sachar weaves together realism and fantasy, by
including elements from fables and folktales in his story. Tall
tales are a popular form of folktale in the United States. Find out
about the characteristics of this kind of narrative by reading
some tall tales. Good collections include Tall Tale America: A
Legendary History of Our Humorous Heroes by Walter Blair and
American Tall Tales by Mary Pope Osborne. Pay attention to how
the writers of these tales use exaggeration to create humor.
Watch for repetition of phrases and themes, and notice how
animals often function as helpers. Then, try writing a tall tale of
your own.
57
Activities
• Wordplay: “Stanley Yelnats” is a palindrome, spelled the
same both forward and backward. Other palindromes include the
words mom, radar, and racecar, and the names Elle, Anna, and
Otto. Whole phrases can be palindromes, too, such as “A daffodil
slid off Ada” and “Rats live on no evil star.” You can find more
palindromes in Jon Agee’s book Go Hang a Salami! I’m a Lasagna
Hog!: and Other Palindromes. Come up with some palindromes of
your own, or make your name into a palindrome. You might also
want to check out some of the Web sites devoted to palindromes
like www.palindromes.com, www.fun-with-words.com, or
www.mockok.com, to see how inventive people can get with this
kind of wordplay.
• What’s in a name?: “There is no lake at Camp Green Lake.”
Places are often named for things that no longer exist: Go down
to Canal Street in New York City and you won’t find anything that
looks even remotely like a canal! Make a list of some places in
your town or city named for features of the landscape that are no
longer there.
• Be a tutor: When Stanley agrees to teach Zero to read, he
learns even more in return and he makes a friend, too. Consider
volunteering to tutor a fellow student in a subject you especially
enjoy. You can offer to work after school with someone who might
58
benefit from extra homework help. Besides, teaching somebody
else is a great way to improve your own skills or knowledge.
• Be inventive: Stanley’s father is an inventor who wants to
find a way to recycle old sneakers. Eventually he stumbles on
the solution to another problem: how to get rid of foot odor!
Brainstorm a list of inventions you think would improve the
world. If you come up with any really fantastic ideas, you might
want to find out about the patenting process. The United
States Patent and Trademark Office has a Web site for kids
(www.uspto.gov/go/kids). Another good site for young inventors
is www.kids.patentcafe.com.
• Mock trial: Put the Warden on trial! Enlist friends or family
members who have read Holes to act as attorneys for the defense
and the prosecution. Assemble evidence, call witnesses, argue
each side of the case—you’ve probably seen enough TV shows
that take place in courtrooms (Court TV, Judging Amy, Law and
Order, The Practice, to name just a few) to have a basic idea of
how the legal process works. Should you let the Warden testify
on her own behalf? Find a friend who hasn’t read Holes to act as
an impartial judge, and let her or him reach a verdict based on
the strength of the case each side presents.
• Make your own sploosh!: “Every summer Miss Katherine
would pick bushels of peaches and preserve them in jars with
cinnamon, cloves, nutmeg, and other spices. . . .” Zero calls the
sweet, muddy liquid he finds in jars under the rowboat “sploosh,”
and it helps keep him alive in the desert after he runs away from
59
camp. Here’s a recipe to help you and an adult re-create Kate
Barlow’s prize-winning spiced peaches.
Kissin’ Kate Barlow’s Spiced Peaches
Ingredients
1 can (29 ounces) peach halves, drained (save the syrup in
a separate bowl)
2/3 cup apple cider vinegar
1 cup light brown sugar, packed
1/4 teaspoon salt
8 whole cloves
1 cinnamon stick
1/4 teaspoon ground nutmeg
Directions
In a saucepan, combine 2/3 cup of the peach syrup with all the
other ingredients except the peaches. Simmer uncovered for
10 minutes.
Pour over peaches. Cool, then cover and chill for at least 24
hours (or 110 years!).
Bring to room temperature and eat. Any leftover peaches will
keep in the refrigerator for a week.
Serves 6.
• Buried treasure: You can bury something fun or interesting
for someone in the future to discover, such as an old toy, an
earring, a plastic bag full of pennies, or anything else you think
might be fun for some future archaeologist to dig up. If you
60
decide to bury an object that will decay, be sure to seal it in a
watertight can or glass jar. You could also make a time capsule:
Pack an empty coffee can or a pickle jar with some photographs,
a newspaper, a tape or CD, a page from your journal, or anything
else that helps capture the feeling of a particular point in history.
Then, seal up your time capsule and bury it in the backyard, or
just put it way back in a closet and promise yourself you won’t
open it for at least five years.
• Wild women of the Wild West: Kissin’ Kate Barlow is a
fictional character, but real female outlaws helped make the Old
West an even wilder place. Visit your local library or go online to
learn about the notorious Belle Starr, known as “the Bandit
Queen”; Cattle Kate; the beautiful Etta Place, who teamed up
with Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid; and other famous
women outlaws.
• Unearth your own family history: Do you know where
your great-grandparents were born, what kind of work they did,
or how they died? Go through old photo albums and scrapbooks,
read old letters and journals, interview the oldest people in your
family, and find out as much as you can about your own roots.
Write down any family stories, songs, or traditions you learn
about in a special notebook, and create a record of your family’s
history to pass down to your descendants.
61
Related Reading
Other books by Louis Sachar
The Boy Who Lost His Face (1989)
Dogs Don’t Tell Jokes (1991)
Johnny’s in the Basement (1981)
Sixth Grade Secrets (1987)
Someday, Angeline (1983)
Stanley Yelnats’s Survival Guide to Camp Green Lake (2003)
There’s a Boy in the Girls’ Bathroom (1987)
Series by Louis Sachar
The Marvin Redpost series (includes Marvin Redpost: Kidnapped
at Birth?, Marvin Redpost: Is He a Girl?, and other titles)
The Wayside School series (Sideways Stories from Wayside
School, Wayside School Is Falling Down, and other titles)
Books about friendship under difficult circumstances
Belle Prater’s Boy by Ruth White
The Pinballs by Betsy Byars
Books about homeless and/or abandoned children
Heaven Eyes by David Almond
Jip: His Story by Katherine Paterson
Maniac Magee by Jerry Spinelli
Monkey Island by Paula Fox
62
63
Books about survival
Among the Hidden by Margaret Peterson Haddix
The Goats by Brock Cole
Hatchet by Gary Paulsen
My Side of the Mountain by Jean Craighead George
The Sign of the Beaver by Elizabeth George Speare
The True Confessions of Charlotte Doyle by Avi
What Jamie Saw by Carolyn Coman
Books that mix magic and realism
Skellig by David Almond
Tuck Everlasting by Natalie Babbitt
Folktales and tall tales
American Tall Tales by Mary Pope Osborne
Cut from the Same Cloth: American Women of Myth, Legend and
Tall Tale by Robert D. San Souci
John Henry by Julius Lester
The People Could Fly: American Black Folktales by Virginia Hamilton
Other books set in Texas
Dancing in Cadillac Light by Kimberly Willis Holt
When Zachary Beaver Came to Town by Kimberly Willis Holt
Bibliography
Books
Sachar, Louis. Holes. New York: Farrar, Straus, and Giroux,
1998.
Interviews
Phone interview with Louis Sachar, September 9, 2002.
Newspapers and magazines
Austin Chronicle, “Louis Sachar: Top of His Class,” by Barbara
Strickland, February 26, 1999, pp. 34–36.
New York Times Book Review, “He Didn’t Do It,” by Betsy Hearne,
November 15, 1998, p. 52.
Seattle Post-Intelligencer, “Holes Has Seattle Middle-Schoolers All on
the Same Page,” by Rebekah Denn, March 7, 2002, pp. D1, D3.
Web sites
Alexlibris: alexlibris.com/rev_holes.asp
Austin Chronicle: austinchronicle.com
The Book Report Network:
www.kidsreads.com/authors/au-sachar-louis.asp
Children’s Book Council:
www.cbcbooks.org/html/louissachar.html
Educational Paperback Association:
www.edupaperback.org/authorbios/Sachar_Louis.html
Public Broadcasting System: www.pbs.org/newshour
Reading Matters: readingmatters.co.uk/books/holes.html
64